---
title: Do we have any good reasons to trust our moral intuition?
date: 2024-10-16
---

# Introduction

Let us first make a distinction between two notions of trusting moral
intuition. One is that moral intuition is self-evident and that people
would arrive at a set of common moral judgments or principles. Another
is the notion that moral intuition is idiosyncratic to each individual.

There has not been consistent agreement over what is moral or what is
ethical throughout history. Moral intuition does not persist completely
across time periods: prior to the mid-20th century, homosexuality was
denounced in almost all jurisdictions and cultures often with
explanations that attempt to argue that homosexuality is "obviously"
wrong---an appeal to intuition---yet we now condemn such discrimination.
Neither does moral intuition align across cultural and geographical
regions: capitalism and individualism are predominant in some regions of
the world while socialism and collectivism are predominant in others;
liberty is considered an inalienable principle in some, but as a mere
means to collective efficiency in others. These are, of course,
political ideologies; but they are often enforced through moral coercion
and enjoy similar arguments on their "obviousness".

There seems to be, however, a set of basic moral intuitions that seems
present in the mind of each "civilized" person. Moral patterns often
explained with intuition such as "killing people is wrong, other than
self-protection against perpetrators who already exhibit an extreme
threat" may *seem* universally acknowledged. But that is an illusion: it
is easy to dismiss the seemingly exceptional case of war and extremism,
but the existence of serious notion of "proudly and fearlessly killing
enemies" as a single counter-example falsifies the hypothesis that the
so-called principle aforementioned is universal. While an analysis is
warranted on each individual principle that claims to be universal, I
doubt that any such claim would be supported.

Even if a generalized principle such as "murder is wrong \[\...\]" is
universal, it does not naturally follow that each person yields an
equivalent result for every individual case where a moral judgement is
made, on whether killing at a particular moment with a well-defined
context, is wrong.

Therefore, it is difficult, if not impossible, to discuss moral
intuition in terms of a collective intuition of a group. I shall proceed
assuming that we refer to individual intuition in this essay.

When we consider whether we should trust something, we must first
declare *for what purpose* is this trust being contemplated. I will
iterate through them and discuss each, in the following sections.

# Making a moral judgement

The core of my argument is that individual moral judgements of specific
events are ultimately made by intuition.

Many philosophers traditionally labelled as moral intuitionists such as
Prichard believe that moral intuition is self-evident [@prichard]. I
have discussed my rejection of this view in the introduction and I
dissent his implicit assumption that moral judgement is nearly
universal. But he is right in saying that moral judgement needs no
proof. Let us then take a look at some alternatives to individual moral
intuitionism, and I shall then discuss why these are less consistent and
less correct than moral intuitionism.

What if we stick to moral frameworks such as Bentham's utilitarianism,
Mill's revision of utilitarianism, Kantian categorical imperatives?

I, as an individual, reject some parts of them and accept others. The
common process of developing or considering the validity of an ethical
principle often consists of testing moral dilemmas based on intuition,
and, in doing so, refining the principle or rejecting it when it yields
a result or reasoning that we consider "absurd". For example, I reject
Kant's absolute prohibition against lying, as I intuitively find it
absurd to forbid myself from lying to a murderer who threatens to find
and kill my friend---I make the hypothesis and imagine potentially
contributing to my friend's chance of death for the sake of not telling
lies, and I assert, intuitively, that it is not worth it. I also reject
dogmatically applying Bentham's utilitarianism due to intuitive
counter-examples, such as the intuitive immorality of pushing a heavy
person off a bridge to stop a runaway trolley (as described in [@justice
21]). Therefore intuition on individual cases is the basis that gives
birth to moral principles and framework.

Never have I seen a moral framework or principle that has a meticulous
proof or reasoning on why it is correct, from first principles. And this
is precisely because these first principles do not exist without
intuition. For example, @kant-intuition [2] claims that Kant is a moral
intuitionist as his reasoning for categorical imperatives cites the need
to "\[feel\] pleasure or \[...\] delight in the fulfillment of duty"
[@gmm]. *Any* judgement on a contextualized real event by an individual
is ultimately moderated by intuition, notwithstanding the
thought-process that the individual uses at surface level.

# Ethics and morality

What distinguishes ethics from morality is that ethics are values that
are culturally and collectively upheld, while morality stems from an
individual's sense of what is "good" and what is "bad". The process of
the formulation of ethics could vary, although they generally carry the
goal of the preservation of a collective group such as to form the basis
of social order.

Intuition is naturally idiosyncratic even within one community expected
to possess similar ethics, which contraindicates the possibility of
intuition as a trustworthy source of ethics. The goal of ethics is not
the same as that of moral judgement; ethics attempts to produce
generalized principles in a society that can provide consensus,
stability, and collective prosperity. That is not a goal that individual
intuition can attain, and is better suited for analysis of evidence and
social conventions.

# Conclusion

Therefore, pertaining to the moral judgement of individual events, moral
intuition is not simply trustworthy; it is *the* method of judgement
that oversees all other methods of moral judgement and the development
of moral frameworks or principles. But if the purpose of using moral
intuition is the analysis of ethics, then the answer is a clear *no*.

# Bibliography

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent"
data-entry-spacing="0" role="list">
<div id="ref-kant-intuition" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Dieter Schönecker. 2013. <span>“<span class="nocase">Kant’s Moral
Intuitionism</span>: <span class="nocase">The Fact of Reason and Moral
Predispositions</span>.”</span>
</div>
<div id="ref-gmm" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Kant. 2012. <em><span class="nocase">Groundwork for the Metaphysics of
Morals</span></em>. Translated by Mary Gregor and Jens Timmermann.
Cambridge University Press.
</div>
<div id="ref-prichard" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Prichard, H. A. 1912. <span>“<span class="nocase">Does Moral Philosophy
Rest on a Mistake?</span>”</span> 21.
</div>
<div id="ref-justice" class="csl-entry" role="listitem">
Sandel, Michael J. 2010. <em><span class="nocase">Justice: What’s the
Right Thing to Do?</span></em> Farrar, Straus; Giroux.
</div>
</div>
